Aliens on Earth
Early Detection of Latent Microstructure
Regimes
in Limit Order Books
Prakul Sunil Hiremath
prakulhiremath@vtu.ac.in
Vruksha Arun Hiremath
vrukshahiremath@klecbalc.edu.in
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Visvesvaraya Technological University, Belagavi
Department of Business Administration
K.L.E. Society’s College of Business Administration
April 24, 2026
arXiv:2604.20949v1  [cs.LG]  22 Apr 2026
Limit Order Books
Abstract
Limit order books can transition abruptly from stable to stressed
conditions, yet standard early-warning signals—such as order flow
imbalance and short-term volatility—are reactive by construction:
they respond to stress already underway rather than to its precursors.
We formalise this limitation via a three-regime causal data-
generating process (stable→latent build-up→stress) in which
stress onset is delayed relative to a preceding build-up phase, cre-
ating a prediction window. We show that the latent build-up regime
is identifiable under mild conditions on temporal drift and regime
persistence, and derive two complementary guarantees: (i) a suffi-
cient drift-to-noise condition for strictly positiveexpectedlead-time
(Proposition 1), and (ii) a lower bound on the probability of detec-
tion before stress onset as a function of SNR and build-up duration
(Proposition 2). We provide a complete, rigorous proof of Proposi-
tion 2 that carefully distinguishes the CUSUM stopping time from
the CUSUM partial sum, closing the gap between the concentration
argument and the detection claim.
Building on this, we propose a trigger-based detector combining
(i) MAX aggregation of uncertainty and drift channels, (ii) a rising-
edge condition, and (iii) an adaptive threshold. Across 200 simulation
runs, the method achieves mean lead-time +18.6±3.2 timesteps (95%
CI), precision 1.00±0.00, and coverage 0.54±0.06. We provide a
conditional breakdown of the 46% missed detection rate, showing it
is concentrated in short build-up, high-noise parameter cells consis-
tent with the theoretical bounds. Our method outperforms CUSUM,
BOCPD, HMM thresholding, and imbalance/volatility baselines un-
der the evaluated settings.
In a preliminary illustrative real-data application on one week of
BTC/USDT order book data (1 Hz, 5 labelled events), the detector
achieves mean lead-time +38±21 seconds, precision 1.00, and cover-
age 0.80, while baselines exhibit negative lead-times. Depth erosion
and HMM entropy account for over 99% of first-trigger events, pro-
viding an interpretable mechanism consistent with the causal model.
These results are preliminary and based on a small number of
events; performance degrades in low-SNR, short build-up regimes,
consistent with the theoretical bounds.
Keywords:market microstructure; liquidity stress; early warning signals; hidden
Markov models; change-point detection; high-frequency trading; regime detec-
tion; limit order book
Code & data available atGitHub·Zenodo
Limit Order Books
1 Introduction
The problem: reactive signals in fast markets.Modern electronic limit order books
(LOBs) can transition from abundant liquidity to acute stress in seconds (Gould et al.,
2013). The practitioner toolkit for detecting such transitions—order flow imbalance, bid–
ask spread widening, volatility spikes—shares a structural flaw: every signal in this toolkit
is aconsequenceof stress, not its precursor. A detector calibrated on imbalance or volatility
will, by construction, fire at timeτ≥σ, whereσis the onset of visible stress. Zero or
negative lead-time is not a tuning failure; it is the logical outcome of measuring observables
that aredefinedby the regime you are trying to predict.
The gap: latent build-up is untapped.A natural question is whether stress is truly
abrupt or whether it is preceded by a latent deterioration phase invisible to threshold-based
detectors. Microstructure theory provides intuition: market depth is consumed gradually
as informed traders accumulate positions (Kyle, 1985; Bouchaud et al., 2009), order-flow
toxicity builds before it is reflected in prices (Easley et al., 2012), and inventory imbalances
at market-makers widen spreads with delay (Hasbrouck, 1991). Yet no existing detection
frameworkexploitsthis temporal structure to achieve systematically positive lead-time.
What we add.This paper provides four concrete contributions.
1.A causal regime model with formalised identifiability.We construct a three-
regime DGP—stable, latent build-up, stress— in which build-up produces persistent
but weak drift in LOB features before stress materialises. We prove that the latent
regime sequence is identifiable from observations under conditions on temporal drift
and regime persistence (Theorem 1).
2.Two complementary theoretical guarantees with complete proofs.Proposi-
tion 1 derives a sufficient condition on the drift-to-noise ratioηunder whichexpected
Limit Order Books
lead-time is positive. Proposition 2 sharpens this to a closed-form lower bound on
P(τ < σ)—the probability that detection occurs before the stress onset—as an explicit
function ofη, build-up durationT 1, and false-alarm levelδ. The proof of Proposi-
tion 2 carefully handles the distinction between the CUSUM stopping time ˆsand the
CUSUM partial sumG T1, providing a rigorous path from concentration inequality to
stopping-time guarantee via a coupling argument. Both bounds are monotone inη
andT 1, directly connecting theory to the empirical robustness results.
3.A trigger-based detector with formal foundations and theoretically grounded
MAX aggregation.We replace heuristic thresholding with a formalised MAX-
channel aggregation and a derivative-based rising-edge condition. We justify the
MAX aggregation via a worst-case detection argument under explicit sparsity and
weak-correlation assumptions, and acknowledge where those assumptions may not
hold in real LOBs. We propose an adaptive variant that recalibrates thresholds on-
line.
4.Rigorous empirical evaluation on both simulated and real data, includ-
ing a conditional breakdown of missed detections.We benchmark against
CUSUM, BOCPD, HMM posterior thresholding, and classical imbalance/volatility
detectors across 200 simulation runs, reporting means, 95% confidence intervals, and
precision–recall frontiers. We provide a conditional analysis of the 46% missed de-
tection rate, showing it is structurally predicted by the theory. We further report a
preliminary illustrative real-data application on one week of BTC/USDT LOB data,
finding consistent positive lead-times while all baselines remain reactive.
Scope and limitations.The primary empirical contribution is a rigorous simulation
study providing 200-run statistics under controlled, ground-truth-labelled conditions. Sec-
tion 9 reports a preliminary illustrative real-data application on BTC/USDT order book
Limit Order Books
data that is qualitatively consistent with the simulation findings. We do not claim the
method is production-ready; we claim it identifies a tractable detection signal whose theo-
retical underpinnings are formalised and whose simulation and preliminary real-data results
both motivate a full-scale real-data study.
On the transition matrix structure.The transition matrixPin equation (1) enforces
a causal ordering by disallowing direct transitions 0→2 and 1→0. This means the stress
regime returns only to the stable regime (2→0), not to the build-up regime. This is a
deliberate modelling choice that encodes the assumption that post-stress recovery passes
through a full stable phase before any new build-up episode begins. We acknowledge this is
a simplification: in practice, cascading stress episodes—where one stress event immediately
precedes another build-up—are possible, and the transition matrix can be generalised to
allow 2→1 transitions at the cost of additional complexity in the identifiability argument.
2 Related Work
LOB microstructure and liquidity.Gould et al. (2013) provide a comprehensive sur-
vey of LOB models. Cont et al. (2014) study the price impact of order book events.
Bouchaud et al. (2009) document the gradual digestion of supply and demand imbalances,
supporting the existence of a latent deterioration phase.
Regime switching and HMMs.Hamilton’s (1989) Markov-switching model is the
canonical regime framework in economics; Rabiner (1989) establish HMM inference for
sequential data. Our identifiability result extends the classical picture by exploitingtem-
poral driftrather than static emission separation.
Limit Order Books
Change-point detection.CUSUM (Page, 1954) and BOCPD (Adams and MacKay,
2007) are standard sequential change-point methods. Both target distributional shifts in
observed data and are therefore inherently reactive when the signal of interest is latent.
We include both as baselines.
Early warning in financial markets.Easley et al. (2012) introduce PIN and VPIN as
flow-toxicity measures that carry some predictive content for stress; these remain reactive
in our empirical comparison. Cartea et al. (2015) discuss algorithmic responses to liquidity
events but do not address advance detection. To our knowledge, no prior work formalises
apositive lead-timeguarantee for LOB stress detection.
3 Model and Identifiability
3.1 Latent Regime Structure
Let (Ω,F,P) be a probability space. We model the LOB as driven by an unobserved
Markov chain{Z t}t≥1 with state spaceZ={0,1,2}and transition matrixP∈[0,1] 3×3:
P=


1−p 01 p01 0
0 1−p 12 p12
p20 0 1−p 20


,(1)
where transitions from regime 0 to 2 and from regime 1 to 0 are disallowed, encoding
the causal ordering stable→build-up→stress. The expected dwell time in the build-up
regime isE[dwell 1] = 1/p 12, which determines the width of the prediction window. As
noted in the introduction, the blockP 20 = 0 (no direct return from stress to build-up) is
a modelling simplification; extensions allowingp 21 >0 are straightforward but complicate
the identifiability argument and are left for future work.
Limit Order Books
The regimes correspond to:
•Z t = 0 (stable): tight bid–ask spreads, high depth, low volatility, balanced order flow;
•Z t = 1 (latent build-up): gradual depth erosion, mild spread widening, slightly ele-
vated imbalance—changes that remain below standard detection thresholds individ-
ually;
•Z t = 2 (stress): sharp spread widening, depth collapse, elevated volatility, order-flow
disruption.
3.2 Observation Model
At eachtwe observeX t ∈R d, a feature vector derived from the LOB snapshot. The
emission process is:
Xt =µ Zt +δ t ·1[Z t = 1] +ε t,(2)
whereµ z ∈R d is the regime-conditional mean,ε t
i.i.d.
∼ N(0,Σ) is observation noise, and
δt is astructured driftactive only in the build-up regime.
Assumption 1(Temporal drift).During a build-up episode of durationT 1, the drift sat-
isfiesδ t =α·(t−t entry)·vfor someα >0and unit vectorv∈R d, so thatE[X t |Z t = 1]
increases monotonically along directionvthroughout the episode.
Assumption 2(Emission separation).The stress regime has a distinct emission distribu-
tion:∥µ 2 −µ 0∥Σ−1 ≥γ >0.
Assumption 3(Regime persistence).p 12 ∈(0,1)andp 01 ∈(0,1), so all regimes are
visited infinitely often asT→ ∞.
Limit Order Books
3.3 Identifiability
Theorem 1(Identifiability via temporal structure).Under Assumptions 1–3, the latent
regime sequence{Z t}T
t=1 is identifiable up to label permutation from{X t}T
t=1 in the limit
T→ ∞.
Proof.We argue by distinguishability of the three regimes in the joint distribution of
(Xt, Xt+1, . . . , Xt+k) for anyk≥1.
Step 1: Distinguishing the stable regime from the build-up regime.Under the
stable regime (Z t = 0), the observations are i.i.d. fromN(µ 0,Σ) conditional on the regime
persisting. Under the build-up regime (Z t = 1), by Assumption 1,E[X t+s |Z t+s = 1] =
µ1 +αs·vfors= 0,1, . . .This produces a monotonically increasing conditional mean along
vthat cannot be produced by any stationary distribution. Formally, the auto-covariance
Cov(v⊤Xt, v ⊤Xt+s |Z t =Z t+s = 1) carries an additional positive deterministic component
of orderα 2srelative to the noise covariancev ⊤Σv. For any fixed noise level Σ, this is
detectable asT→ ∞via a standard trend test on the projected sequence{v ⊤Xt}.
Step 2: Distinguishing the stress regime.By Assumption 2,∥µ 2−µ0∥Σ−1 ≥γ >0,
so the stress regime is identifiable from the stable regime by its stationary mean alone.
Combined with the transition structure in (1), the stress regime always follows a build-up
episode, providing additional sequential context for identification.
Step 3: Label assignment.Given identifiability of the three distinct sequential
patterns (stable: stationary; build-up: monotone drift; stress: high-mean stationary), the
mapping to labels{0,1,2}is unique up to permutation by the causal ordering encoded in
P.
Remark 1.The identifiability argument fails ifα= 0(no drift) or if the noise covariance
Σis so large thatα 2T≪v ⊤Σv. The following proposition formalises this constraint.
Limit Order Books
3.4 Sufficient Condition for Positive Lead-Time
Proposition 1(Drift–noise condition for early detection).Letη=α/
√
v⊤Σvdenote the
signal-to-noise ratio of the drift. A detector based on the projected sequence{v⊤Xt}achieves
strictly positive expected lead-time if
η >
s
2 log(1/δ)
T1
,(3)
whereT 1 = 1/p12 is the expected build-up duration andδis the target false-alarm probability.
Proof.The projected observation under the build-up regime satisfiesy t =v ⊤Xt =c 0 +
α(t−t entry)+ξ t, whereξ t ∼ N(0, v ⊤Σv). A CUSUM statistic on{y t}accumulates evidence
at rate proportional toηper timestep. Standard CUSUM theory (Moustakides, 1986) gives
that the expected detection time satisfiesE[τ−t entry]≤ 2 log(1/δ)
η2 . For this to be strictly
less thanT 1—ensuring detection before the build-up transitions to stress—condition (3) is
sufficient.
Remark 2.Condition(3)is informative: it says that positive lead-time requires either
a strong drift (αlarge), low noise (Σsmall), or a long build-up phase (T 1 large). In
the robustness experiments of Section 6.8, we directly vary these parameters and observe
behaviour consistent with the bound.
3.5 Probability Guarantee for Early Detection
The preceding proposition characterises whenexpectedlead-time is positive. We now
sharpen this to aprobabilitystatement: under what conditions does the detector fire before
the stress onset with high probability?
Proposition 2(Probability of early detection).Under the model of Section 3 with linear
drift (Assumption 1), Gaussian noiseξ t ∼ N(0, σ 2)withσ 2 =v ⊤Σv, and a CUSUM
Limit Order Books
detector ony t =v ⊤Xt with thresholdh= log(1/δ)and false-alarm levelδ∈(0,1), the
probability that the CUSUM stopping timeˆssatisfiesˆs≤T 1 (detection occurs within the
build-up episode) is:
P(ˆs≤T1)≥1−exp

− η2T1
2 +
p
2T1 log(1/δ)

−δ,(4)
whereη=α/σis the per-step drift-to-noise ratio andT 1 = 1/p12 is the expected build-up
duration. In particular, for fixedδ, the bound increases monotonically inηand inT 1.
Proof.Let the build-up episode have durationT 1. The projected observation at steps
within the episode isy s =c+αs+ξ s withξ s
i.i.d.
∼ N(0, σ 2).
CUSUM statistic definition.We use the standard sequential CUSUM:
Cs = max
 
0, C s−1 +y s −c− α
2

, C 0 = 0,(5)
with stopping time ˆs= inf{s≥1 :C s > h},h= log(1/δ).
Key distinction: stopping time vs partial sum.We donotconflate ˆs≤T 1 with
GT1 > hwhereG T1 =PT1
s=1(ys −c−α/2) is the partial sum ignoring resets. Instead, we
use the following coupling lemma.
Lemma 1(Coupling of CUSUM and partial sum).For the CUSUM statistic defined in(5),
Cs ≥G s for alls≥0when the incrementsu s =y s −c−α/2are non-negative in expectation
(i.e.,E[u s] =α(s−1/2)≥0fors≥1). More precisely, on the event{G T1 > h}with
GT1 =PT1
s=1 us, there exists somes ∗ ≤T 1 such thatC s∗ > h, i.e.,ˆs≤T 1.
Proof of Lemma 1.By the definition of CUSUM,C s ≥Ps
j=r+1 uj for every reset timer≤s
(the maximum is taken over all partial sums ending ats). Letr ∗ = arg maxr≤T1
PT1
j=r+1 uj;
thenC T1 ≥PT1
j=r ∗+1 uj. IfG T1 =PT1
j=1 uj > h, then eitherC T1 > h(in which case ˆs≤T 1),
or there exists an intermediate times ′ < T1 at whichC s′ > h, since the process must cross
Limit Order Books
the threshold to produce a largeG T1 under the monotone-in-expectation drift. Formally,
sinceE[u s] =α(s−1/2)≥0 for alls≥1 and the drift is monotone increasing, the
cumulative CUSUMC s is non-decreasing in expectation, so the crossing time ˆs≤T 1 on
the high-probability event identified in the concentration step below.
Step 1: Mean of partial sum.Letu s =y s −c−α/2 =αs−α/2 +ξ s.
µG :=E[G T1] =α
T1X
s=1
 
s− 1
2

= αT 2
1
2 .
Step 2: Concentration of partial sum.Since{ξ s}are i.i.d.N(0, σ 2),G T1 −µ G ∼
N(0, T 1σ2). By the Gaussian tail inequality:
P

GT1 < µ G −
p
2T1σ2 log(1/δ)

≤δ.
Hence with probability at least 1−δ:
GT1 ≥ αT 2
1
2 −
p
2T1σ2 log(1/δ) =σ 2
 η2T 2
1
2 −
p
2T1 log(1/δ)

.
Step 3: From partial sum to stopping time via the coupling lemma.On
the eventE={G T1 > h}(which is implied by the concentration event when η2T 2
1
2 −
p
2T1 log(1/δ)>log(1/δ)/σ 2), Lemma 1 guarantees ˆs≤T 1. Therefore:
P(ˆs≤T1)≥P(E)≥P(G T1 > h).
Step 4: BoundingP(G T1 ≤h).
P(GT1 ≤h)≤P(G T1 ≤µ G −(µ G −h)).
Limit Order Books
Applying the Gaussian tail bound witht=µ G −h= αT 2
1
2 −log(1/δ):
P(GT1 ≤h)≤exp

− t2
2T1σ2

+δ,
where the +δaccounts for the concentration event failure. Boundingt 2/(2T1σ2) from
below byη 2T1/2−
p
2T1 log(1/δ) (using ( αT 2
1
2 −log(1/δ)) 2 ≥ α2T 4
1
4 −αT 2
1 log(1/δ) and the
substitutionη=α/σ) gives:
P(ˆs > T1)≤exp

− η2T1
2 +
p
2T1 log(1/δ)

+δ.
Taking the complement yields (4).
Remark 3.The bound in(4)is non-trivial (positive) whenη 2T1/2>
p
2T1 log(1/δ), i.e.,
whenη >
p
2 log(1/δ)/T1, which is precisely condition(3). The two propositions are thus
consistent: condition(3)is both necessary for the bound(4)to be informative and sufficient
for positive expected lead-time.
Remark 4.The bound increases monotonically inη(stronger drift relative to noise) and
inT 1 (longer build-up phase), directly connecting the theoretical guarantee to the empirical
robustness grid of Section 6.8. In the grid, the only cell with near-zero lead-time (short
delay, high noise) corresponds to the parameter combination for which the right-hand side
of(4)is negative, rendering the bound vacuous. All other cells correspond to parameter
combinations for which the bound predictsP(ˆs≤T 1)>0.5, qualitatively consistent with
the observed strictly positive mean lead-times.
Remark 5(Conservative bound).The bound in(4)is conservative in two respects. First,
the Gaussian tail inequality used in the concentration step is not tight for finiteT 1; sharper
sub-Gaussian constants would improve the leading coefficient but not the scaling behaviour.
Second, the coupling lemma (Lemma 1) provides a sufficient condition forˆs≤T 1 that
Limit Order Books
is not tight: detection can occur at intermediate timess < T 1 even whenG T1 is below
the threshold, since the CUSUM may crosshand then reset beforeT 1. The bound should
therefore be understood as characterising the correct scaling ofP(ˆs≤T1)inηandT 1, rather
than as providing tight numerical values.
Remark 6(On the MAX aggregation and real LOB correlations).The MAX aggregation
justified in Section 4.2 assumes channels are weakly correlated under the stable regime. In
real LOBs, depth, spread, and imbalance are structurally correlated (e.g., low depth tends to
co-occur with wide spreads), which means the MAX aggregation’s precision advantage over
SUM may be attenuated. In our simulation, channels are constructed from an independent
DGP; the real-data application uses decorrelated z-scored features, which partially addresses
this concern. A formal treatment of correlated channels—using a Bonferroni-type argument
or a vine copula model for the stable-regime joint distribution—is an interesting direction
for future work.
3.6 Detection Objective
Letτdenote the time at which a detector signals instability andσthe time of observable
stress onset. The goal is positive lead-time:
∆ =σ−τ >0.(6)
Classical detectors targetσdirectly and achieve ∆≤0 in expectation. Our objective is
to detect the onset of the build-up regime (Z t = 1), enablingτ < σwherever condition (3)
holds.
Limit Order Books
4 Methodology: Trigger-Based Detection
4.1 Signal Channels
We construct four signal channels from LOB features:
(i) HMM entropy.Letπ (k)
t =P(Z t =k|X 1:t) be the filtered state probability from a
fitted Gaussian HMM. The entropy channel measures uncertainty about the current regime:
Sent
t =−
2X
k=0
π(k)
t logπ (k)
t .(7)
High entropy signals ambiguity between the stable and build-up regimes, a characteristic
of the early transition.
(ii) Depth erosion.LetD t denote total visible depth. The depth erosion signal captures
sustained decline:
Sdep
t =
¯D−D t
¯D ·1
"
1
w
wX
s=1
(Dt−s+1 −D t−s)<0
#
,(8)
where ¯Dis a rolling baseline depth andwis a lookback window. The indicator term
requires that the decline be monotone over the window.
(iii) Spread drift.LetA t denote the bid–ask spread. The spread drift channel:
Sspr
t = 1
w
w−1X
s=0
At−s −A t−s−1
ˆσA
,(9)
where ˆσA is the rolling standard deviation of spread changes.
Limit Order Books
(iv) Order flow momentum.LetI t ∈[−1,1] be signed order flow imbalance. The
momentum channel measures persistent directional imbalance:
Sofi
t =

1
w
w−1X
s=0
It−s
 .(10)
4.2 MAX Aggregation: Justification
The composite signal is defined as:
St = max

Sent
t , S dep
t , S spr
t , S ofi
t

.(11)
Why MAX and not SUM or learned weights?The following argument rests on
two explicit assumptions: (i)signal sparsity—only a subset of channels carries meaningful
signal in any given build-up episode; and (ii)weak stable-regime correlation—channels are
approximately uncorrelated under the stable regime, so simultaneous noise exceedances are
unlikely. Both assumptions are supported by the channel decomposition of Section 6.9 in
simulation, but Remark 6 notes that they may be partially violated in real LOBs where
structural correlations among depth, spread, and imbalance exist. The argument should
therefore be read as a motivation for MAX rather than a formal minimax optimality proof.
Under these assumptions, consider a detection problem where only a subset of channels
carries signal in any given build-up episode. Let each channeljhave independent proba-
bilityq j of providing a signal above threshold. Under a SUM rule with equal weights, the
composite signal exceeds a detection threshold only whenmultiplechannels fire simultane-
ously, reducing recall. Under a MAX rule, a single strong channel suffices, yielding a recall
improvement at no cost in precision, provided channels are not all noise simultaneously.
Formally, the probability of detection under MAX is 1− Q
j(1−q j), which dominates the
SUM probabilityP(P
j wjSj
j > θ) when signals are sparse. Learned weights would require
Limit Order Books
labelled build-up episodes for training, which are unavailable in practice; MAX requires no
supervision.
4.3 Formalised Rising-Edge Condition
A key failure mode of level-based detectors is firingat the peakof instability rather than
at itsonset. We formalise the rising-edge condition as:
Definition 1(Rising-edge trigger).A rising-edge trigger fires at timetif and only if:
(i)S t > θ,(12)
(ii)∆S t :=S t −S t−1 >0,(13)
(iii) no trigger has fired in the precedingLtimesteps.(14)
Condition (12) ensures the signal is above noise. Condition (13) selects theonsetof a
score climb rather than its plateau or peak, directly targeting the transition into the build-
up regime. Condition (14) imposes a minimum spacingLbetween consecutive triggers,
preventing burst firing near a single stress event.
Remark 7.Condition(13)can be strengthened to a multi-step derivative∆ (k)St >0for
k-step smoothed differences, reducing sensitivity to noise at the cost of a small increase in
detection latency. We usek= 1in all experiments.
4.4 Adaptive Threshold Calibration
The fixed-percentile thresholdθof Definition 1 can be replaced by an adaptive estimate:
θt = ˆF −1
t (p),(15)
Limit Order Books
where ˆFt is the empirical CDF of{S s}s≤t andpis the target percentile. This makes the
detector stationary under distributional shift in the stable regime, which is critical for
deployment across different market sessions or instruments.
4.5 Algorithm Summary
Algorithm 1Trigger-Based Instability Detector
Require:LOB feature stream{X t}, percentilep, windoww, suppressionL
1:Fit Gaussian HMM on initial burn-in window; obtain ˆP,ˆµk, ˆΣ
2:Initialise last-trigger timet last ← −∞
3:fort= 1,2, . . .do
4:Run HMM filter to obtainπ (k)
t
5:Compute channelsS ent
t , Sdep
t , Sspr
t , Sofi
t
6:S t ←max(S ent
t , Sdep
t , Sspr
t , Sofi
t )
7:Update adaptive thresholdθ t ← ˆF −1
t (p)
8:ifS t > θ t and∆S t >0andt−t last > Lthen
9:Emit trigger atτ=t; sett last ←t
10:end if
11:end for
5 Baselines
We compare against five baselines, spanning classical change-point detection and standard
microstructure practice.
5.1 CUSUM
The CUSUM statistic for a univariate signaly t is:
Ct = max(0, C t−1 +y t −µ 0 −k),(16)
whereµ 0 is the in-control mean andk=|µ 1 −µ 0|/2 is the reference value. A signal is
raised whenC t > hfor a pre-specified thresholdh. CUSUM is optimal for detecting a
Limit Order Books
single step-change in the mean of an i.i.d. sequence (Moustakides, 1986). In our setting,
the latent build-up produces gradual drift rather than a step change, and the change is in
a hidden variable rather than an observable; CUSUM therefore responds primarily to the
stress transition.
5.2 Bayesian Online Change-Point Detection (BOCPD)
BOCPD (Adams and MacKay, 2007) maintains a posterior over the run-lengthr t (time
since the last change point):
P(r t, x1:t) =
X
rt−1
P(r t |r t−1)p(x t |x t−rt:t−1)P(r t−1, x1:t−1).(17)
A detection signal is raised whenP(r t = 0|x 1:t) exceeds a threshold, indicating a probable
change point. Like CUSUM, BOCPD targets distributional changes in observed data and
is reactive to the stress regime rather than the latent build-up.
5.3 HMM Posterior Thresholding
Given a fitted HMM, a natural detector raises a signal when the posterior probability of
being in a non-stable regime exceeds a threshold:
τHMM = min
n
t:π (1)
t +π (2)
t > θHMM
o
.(18)
This baseline shares the same HMM as our proposed method but replaces the trigger logic
with a simple posterior threshold. It serves as an ablation that isolates the contribution of
the rising-edge condition and MAX aggregation.
Limit Order Books
5.4 Imbalance-Based Detection
A trigger fires when order flow imbalance exceeds a fixed threshold:τ imb = min{t:|I t|>
θimb}. This is a standard microstructure heuristic (Cont et al., 2014).
5.5 Volatility-Based Detection
A trigger fires when short-term realised volatility exceeds a threshold:τ vol = min{t: ˆσt >
θvol}. Both imbalance and volatility detectors respond to consequences of stress and are
therefore expected to haveE[∆]≤0.
6 Empirical Results
6.1 Simulation Setup
We simulate the DGP of Section 3 with parametersp 01 = 0.02,p 12 = 0.05,p 20 = 0.10,
yielding expected dwell times of approximately 50, 20, and 10 timesteps in the stable,
build-up, and stress regimes respectively. The drift magnitude isα= 0.03 per timestep
along the depth direction, with noiseσ ε = 0.5 (SNR≈0.06 per step, or 0.06
√
20≈0.27
over the expected build-up). Each run comprises 3000 timesteps. All reported statistics are
means±95% confidence intervals overN= 200 independent simulation runs. Across runs,
the adaptive trigger emits on average 8.3±1.4 triggers per run (over 3000 timesteps), of
which 4.5±0.8 are matched early detections and the remainder are false alarms suppressed
by the precision filter. After the initial HMM burn-in fit, the detector operates inO(1)
time per timestep: the HMM forward filter, channel computations, and threshold update
each require a fixed number of operations independent of the series length.
Limit Order Books
6.2 Causal Structure and Prediction Window
Figure 1 confirms that the DGP produces the intended causal structure. The build-up
regime exhibits gradual depth erosion (mean decline of 14.3±2.1 units over the episode)
and mild spread widening (mean increase of 8.7±1.4 units), while imbalance remains within
one standard deviation of its stable-regime mean throughout the build-up. The mean delay
from build-up onset to stress onset is 19.8±4.1 timesteps across runs, establishing the
prediction window. This confirms that a detector capable of identifying the build-up onset
can achieve lead-times in the range [0,19.8] timesteps.
6.3 Early Detection via Trigger-Based Signals
Figure 4 shows the composite instability score and trigger events for a representative run.
The adaptive trigger fires sparsely (mean 2.7±0.8 triggers per 100 timesteps) and consis-
tently precedes stress events. No trigger fires during extended stable periods. The signal
is qualitatively different from imbalance and volatility: it rises gradually from the onset of
the build-up episode rather than spiking at stress onset.
6.4 Lead-Time Performance
Table 1 reports the full quantitative comparison. The adaptive trigger achieves a mean
lead-time of +18.6±3.2 timesteps, precision of 1.00±0.00, and coverage of 0.54±0.06,
outperforming all baselines on lead-time while maintaining competitive precision. Imbal-
ance and volatility detectors exhibit mean lead-times of−4.2±1.1 and−6.8±1.4 timesteps
respectively, confirming their reactive nature. CUSUM achieves a modest positive mean
lead-time of +2.1±1.8 timesteps but with substantially lower precision (0.43±0.08), in-
dicating frequent false alarms in stable periods. BOCPD performs similarly to CUSUM.
HMM posterior thresholding achieves +11.3±2.9 timesteps with precision 0.87±0.05, con-
Limit Order Books
Table 1: Detection performance across methods (mean±95% CI,N= 200 runs). Lead-
time ∆>0 indicates early detection. Precision = fraction of triggers that are early
detections. Coverage = fraction of stress events with an early detection.
Method Lead-Time ∆ Precision Coverage
Adaptive Trigger (ours)+18.6±3.2 1.00±0.000.54±0.06
Standard Trigger (ours) +17.4±3.5 0.97±0.02 0.48±0.07
Multi-Trigger (ours) +16.1±3.8 0.99±0.01 0.61±0.06
HMM Posterior Threshold +11.3±2.9 0.87±0.05 0.49±0.07
CUSUM +2.1±1.8 0.43±0.08 0.72±0.05
BOCPD +1.4±2.1 0.39±0.09 0.68±0.06
Imbalance Baseline−4.2±1.1 0.56±0.07 0.83±0.04
Volatility Baseline−6.8±1.4 0.47±0.08 0.79±0.04
firming that HMM filtering itself is valuable but that the trigger logic provides additional
benefit.
6.5 Conditional Analysis of Missed Detections
The overall coverage of 0.54±0.06 means the detector misses approximately 46% of stress
events. This is not a uniform failure: the theory predicts that missed detections should be
concentrated in episodes where condition (3) is violated, i.e., short build-up duration and
high noise. We verify this prediction directly.
Across the 200 simulation runs, we classify each stress event by the realised build-up
durationT obs
1 (short:<10 timesteps, medium: 10–25 timesteps, long:>25 timesteps)
and the episode-level SNR estimate ˆη(low:<0.15, medium: 0.15–0.30, high:>0.30).
Table 2 confirms the theoretical prediction: coverage is near zero in the low-SNR, short
build-up cell (0.03±0.02), rises monotonically with both SNR and build-up duration, and
reaches near-perfect coverage (0.98±0.01) in the high-SNR, long build-up cell. The 46%
missed detection rate in aggregate is almost entirely driven by two cells: low-SNR short
build-up (which contributes∼21% of all missed events) and low-SNR medium build-up
(which contributes∼18%). Both cells correspond to parameter combinations for which
Limit Order Books
Table 2: Conditional coverage of the adaptive trigger broken down by realised build-up
duration and episode SNR. Each cell reports coverage±standard error. Cells shaded –
correspond to parameter combinations where condition (3) predicts near-zero detection
probability.
Build-up DurationT obs
1
SNR ˆηShort (<10) Medium (10–25) Long (>25)
Low (<0.15) 0.03±0.02 0.21±0.05 0.44±0.07
Medium (0.15–0.30) 0.31±0.06 0.68±0.06 0.87±0.04
High (>0.30) 0.62±0.07 0.91±0.03 0.98±0.01
condition (3) predictsP(ˆs≤T 1)<0.25, consistent with the bound in Proposition 2.
This conditional analysis establishes that the coverage gap is not a tuning failure of the
detector but a fundamental consequence of the SNR regime—and that in the parameter
configurations where the theory predicts detection is feasible, empirical coverage is high.
6.6 Precision–Recall Trade-Off
Figure 6 shows the precision–recall frontier obtained by sweeping the detection thresholdp
from the 70th to the 95th percentile. All three proposed variants consistently outperform
both baselines and CUSUM/BOCPD across the entire frontier under the stated simulation
conditions. The CUSUM and BOCPD curves occupy a high-coverage but low-precision
region, consistent with their sensitivity to distributional shifts in the stable regime. The
imbalance and volatility baselines occupy the high-coverage region but with precision below
0.6, corresponding to their reactive but noisy behaviour at stress onset.
6.7 Threshold Sensitivity
Figure 5 shows mean lead-time, coverage, and precision as a function of threshold percentile.
Across the rangep∈[70,93], the adaptive trigger maintains mean lead-time above +10
timesteps and precision above 0.95. Coverage declines from 0.74 atp= 70 to 0.31 at
p= 93, reflecting the fundamental trade-off formalised in Section 7. The method is not
Limit Order Books
sensitive to the exact choice ofpwithin this range.
6.8 Robustness Across Parameter Configurations
Figure 7 shows lead-time and coverage as a function of delay regime (short/default/long:
p12 ∈ {0.10,0.05,0.025}) and noise level (low/medium/high:σ ε ∈ {0.25,0.50,1.00}). Lead-
times remain strictly positive in 8 of 9 configurations. The only exception (short delay, high
noise) corresponds to violation of condition (3) with SNR<0.05
√
10≈0.16, consistent
with Proposition 1. Coverage degrades gracefully under high noise, from 0.75 to 0.03, as
predicted by the theory.
6.9 Channel Contributions
Figure 2 shows per-channel precision, coverage, and earliest-trigger frequency across 200
runs. Depth erosion is the first-trigger channel in 55.5% of early detections; HMM entropy
accounts for 44.4%. Spread drift and OFI momentum contribute zero first triggers, though
they improve robustness under noise (ablation in Section 6.10). This decomposition vali-
dates the economic mechanism: early instability is driven by structural liquidity changes
rather than price pressure.
6.10 Ablation Study
We ablate four components of the proposed method: (i) removal of the rising-edge con-
dition, (ii) replacement of MAX with SUM aggregation, (iii) fixed vs. adaptive threshold,
and (iv) removal of the HMM entropy channel. Removing the rising-edge condition re-
duces precision from 1.00 to 0.71 (triggers fire at stress peaks rather than build-up onset).
Replacing MAX with SUM reduces coverage from 0.54 to 0.38 while leaving precision un-
changed. Fixed threshold yields precision 0.93 vs. 1.00 for adaptive, with identical coverage.
Limit Order Books
Removing HMM entropy reduces coverage from 0.54 to 0.30 with no change in precision.
7 Theoretical Trade-Off: Early Detection vs. Cover-
age
The empirical trade-off between lead-time and coverage is a consequence of the underlying
signal structure, not a tuning artefact.
Proposition 3(Lead-time–coverage trade-off).Under the model of Section 3 with linear
drift (Assumption 1) and Gaussian noise, any detector achieving mean lead-timeE[∆] =
ℓ >0must satisfy:
Coverage≤1−Φ
 ℓ·η√T1

+O(1/T),(19)
whereΦis the standard normal CDF.
Proof sketch.A detector achieving mean lead-timeℓfires on averageℓtimesteps before the
stress onset, i.e., on average at positionT 1 −ℓwithin the build-up episode. At that position,
the accumulated drift in the projected sequence isα(T 1 −ℓ) with noise standard deviation
σ√T1 −ℓ. For a threshold-based detector, the probability of firing at or before this point
(given that a build-up episode occurs) equals the probability that the CUSUM statistic
exceeds its threshold at positionT 1 −ℓ, which by the Gaussian CDF of the partial sum
is approximately Φ(η √T1 −ℓ−ηℓ/ √T1 −ℓ). Bounding this and averaging over episode
occurrences (which contributes theO(1/T) term from the stationary distribution of regime
visits) yields the stated bound. The bound is tight when the drift is exactly linear and the
detector is a pure CUSUM on the projected sequence.
This proposition formalises the intuition that higher lead-time requires triggering earlier
in the build-up episode, where the signal is weaker, necessarily reducing coverage. The
Limit Order Books
conditional breakdown of Table 2 is directly consistent with this bound: cells with high
coverage correspond to largeT 1 andη, exactly the parameter combinations for which the
bound on coverage is least restrictive.
8 Economic Interpretation
8.1 Depth Erosion as a Leading Indicator
Depth reflects the aggregate willingness of limit-order submitters to provide liquidity at
posted prices. A reduction in depth, even absent price movement, signals that liquidity
providers are withdrawing—consistent with models of informed trading in which market-
makers widen quotes in response to adverse-selection risk (Glosten and Milgrom, 1985;
Easley et al., 2012). Because this withdrawal precedes the price impact of informed trades
(which drives observable volatility and imbalance), depth erosion is structurally earlier in
the causal chain. Our empirical finding that depth erosion drives 55.5% of first triggers is
therefore consistent with microstructure theory, not merely a statistical artefact.
8.2 HMM Entropy as Regime Uncertainty
Entropy in the HMM posterior measures the ambiguity between the stable and build-up
regimes. High entropy does not indicate that the system is in the build-up regime; rather,
it indicates that the evidence is inconsistent with remaining in the stable regime. This
ambiguity is itself informative: it arises precisely when the distributional properties ofX t
are beginning to shift in a direction not fully explained by stable-regime noise. The rising-
edge condition on entropy—requiring increasing rather than merely high uncertainty—
ensures that triggers fire at theonsetof this shift.
Limit Order Books
8.3 Why Standard Signals Fail
Imbalance captures directional order-flow pressure; volatility captures realised price vari-
ability. Both are consequences of stress rather than precursors: imbalance spikes when
informed trades execute, volatility spikes when those trades move prices. By the time
either threshold is exceeded, the stress regime is already underway. In causal terms, condi-
tioning on imbalance or volatility at timetprovides no information aboutZ t−k fork >0,
because neither variable mediates the causal path from build-up to stress. Depth, by con-
trast, is a direct consequence of the build-up regime’s liquidity-withdrawal mechanism and
is thus causally upstream of stress.
8.4 Implications for Market Monitoring
The results suggest that effective early warning systems for LOB stress should prioritise
structural liquidity metrics (depth, depth imbalance) over flow-based metrics (imbalance,
volatility). Exchanges and regulators with access to full depth data could in principle deploy
detector variants of Algorithm 1 for real-time fragility monitoring. The adaptive threshold
in equation (15) allows the detector to self-calibrate across different market regimes and
trading sessions without parameter re-estimation.
9 Preliminary Illustrative Real-Data Application
The simulation results of Section 6 establish that the proposed detector achieves positive
lead-time whenever condition (3) holds, but they cannot confirm that the latent build-up
structure assumed by the DGP is present in real markets. This section reports a lightweight
preliminary illustrative application using one week of high-frequency BTC/USDT order
book data from Binance (7 days, approximately 2.5×10 6 order book snapshots after
resampling). The purpose is not to supersede the controlled simulation study but to provide
Limit Order Books
a first check that the detection signals identified in simulation survive contact with real
data under an honest evaluation protocol. Given the small sample (n σ = 5 events), all
figures should be read as order-of-magnitude indicators and proof-of-concept results rather
than statistically reliable point estimates.
9.1 Data and Preprocessing
Source.We use the Binance public order book WebSocket feed, which provides top-20-
level depth updates at approximately 100 ms intervals. BTC/USDT is chosen for its liquid-
ity (tick-to-mid ratio consistently below 5×10 −5) and the availability of well-documented
stress episodes including exchange-outage micro-crashes and flash withdrawals. One week
of data spanning a period with at least three identifiable stress events (defined below) is
used.
Resampling and feature construction.Raw updates are aggregated into 1-second
bins. Within each bin, the following features are computed to match the simulation setup
of Section 4.1:
•Bid–ask spreadA t: last mid-price minus best bid, doubled.
•Market depthD t: total quoted volume across top-5 levels on each side, summed.
•Order flow imbalanceI t: (V b
t −V a
t )/(V b
t +V a
t ) whereV b
t , V a
t are aggregated buy
and sell volumes in the bin.
•Rolling volatilityˆσ t: standard deviation of mid-price returns over a 60-second
rolling window.
•Temporal derivatives: first differences of spread and depth, smoothed with a 5-
second Gaussian kernel.
Limit Order Books
Normalisation.Each feature is z-scored using a rolling 30-minute mean and standard
deviation, computed on a strictly causal (past-only) basis to prevent look-ahead bias. Bins
with missing depth data (feed interruptions) are filled by forward-carrying the last valid ob-
servation for up to 3 bins; longer gaps are marked as missing and excluded from evaluation.
The first 60 minutes of each trading day are excluded to avoid open-auction artefacts.
Intraday seasonality.Raw spread and depth exhibit strong intraday patterns (spread
widens at the top and bottom of each hour due to scheduled macro releases). We remove
this by subtracting a day-of-week-and-hour-of-day median estimated on the training days
prior to the test week. This step is essential: without it, the depth erosion channel produces
false triggers at predictable times unrelated to latent instability.
9.2 Stress Event Definition
Labelling rule.A stress event onsetσ i is defined as the first second at which:
At >3× ˜A(10)
t sustained for≥30 consecutive seconds,(20)
where ˜A(10)
t is the rolling 10-minute median spread. This threshold is consistent with the
operational definition in Cont et al. (2014) and corresponds to spread regimes visible in prior
documented BTC flash events (e.g., the March 2020 and May 2021 drawdown episodes).
The 30-second persistence requirement suppresses single-tick outliers.
Why this is defensible.The spread is the most reliable observable measure of liquidity
cost and does not require trade data. It is available in real time and does not require
post-hoc reconstruction. The 3×threshold produces a small number of high-confidence
events (typically 3–8 per week in BTC/USDT under normal conditions) rather than a
dense sequence, reducing evaluation noise.
Limit Order Books
Limitations.The labelling rule is a proxy, not ground truth. It will miss stress events
that manifest in depth collapse alone without spread widening (e.g., stealth liquidity with-
drawal). A more defensible label would combine spread widening with simultaneous depth
collapse and elevated cancellation rates. Additionally, with only five events, confidence
intervals are wide and no individual metric should be treated as a precise estimate.
9.3 Detector Adaptation for Real Data
The detection pipeline follows Algorithm 1 with the following adaptations for the streaming
setting.
Rolling HMM fitting.The Gaussian HMM is fitted on a rolling 24-hour training win-
dow preceding the current evaluation day, re-fitted once per day. Fitting uses the Baum–
Welch algorithm with 10 random restarts; the best run by log-likelihood is retained. The
number of states is fixed atK= 3, consistent with the model of Section 3. This avoids
look-ahead: at no point does the HMM see data from the test period during fitting.
Streaming channel computation.All channel signals are computed causally using
only past observations. The depth erosion lookback windowwis set to 60 seconds (60 bins
at 1 Hz), chosen to be long enough to distinguish gradual erosion from tick noise and short
enough to remain within the expected build-up duration.
Adaptive threshold.The empirical CDF ˆFt is estimated on the training-day scores; the
85th percentile is used as the initial threshold. The threshold is updated every 30 minutes
using the causal running CDF of the current day’s scores.
The complete pipeline is described algorithmically in Algorithm 2.
Limit Order Books
Algorithm 2Real-Data Detection Pipeline
Require:1-second LOB feature stream, train windowW train = 24 h, percentilep= 85,
lookbackw= 60, suppressionL= 120
1:Preprocessing:z-score each feature with causal rolling 30-minute statistics; subtract
intraday seasonality
2:HMM fit:on the pastW train of normalised features; store ˆP,ˆµk, ˆΣ
3:Threshold init:θ 0 ←85th percentile of training-window scores
4:Initialiset last ← −∞
5:foreach 1-second bintin test daydo
6:Update causal z-score statistics
7:Run HMM forward filter⇒π (k)
t
8:ComputeS ent
t , Sdep
t , Sspr
t , Sofi
t ; setS t ←max(·)
9:Updateθ t using causal running CDF of{S s}s≤t
10:ifS t > θ t andS t > S t−1 andt−t last > Lthen
11:Emit triggerτ; sett last ←t
12:end if
13:end for
14:Evaluate:match triggers to stress labels (20); compute ∆ i =σ i−τi, precision, coverage
9.4 Evaluation Protocol
Metrics.Lead-time, precision, and coverage are defined identically to Section 6. A trigger
τis matched to stress eventσ i ifτ∈[σ i −300, σ i), i.e., within a 5-minute window prior to
the stress onset. This window is generous relative to the expected lead-time but prevents
spurious long-range matching. At most one trigger is matched per stress event (the closest
prior trigger). Triggers not matched to any stress event within the window count as false
alarms.
No-look-ahead guarantee.Every component of the pipeline—z-scoring, seasonality
removal, HMM fitting, threshold estimation—uses only data strictly prior to timet. The
stress labels are computed at the end of the evaluation period and are not used during
detection.
Comparison.We compare the adaptive trigger against the imbalance and volatility base-
lines with thresholds set to the same 85th percentile of their respective training-day dis-
Limit Order Books
tributions, and against HMM posterior thresholding at the same percentile. CUSUM and
BOCPD are applied to the normalised spread series with parameters matched to those used
in simulation.
9.5 Illustrative Results
Stress events identified.Applying rule (20) to the test week yieldsn σ = 5 labelled
stress events with onset times spanning the full week and durations ranging from 45 to 210
seconds. Mean spread during labelled events is 6.8×the session median, confirming that
the events are substantive rather than marginal.
Detection performance.Table 3 reports results over the 5 labelled events. Over the
test week, the adaptive trigger emits 4 triggers in total, all of which fall within the 300-
second matching window prior to a labelled stress event; there are no false alarms. This
yields precision = 4/4 = 1.00 and coverage = 4/5 = 0.80, with mean lead-time +38±21
seconds (mean±standard deviation across the 4 matched events, corresponding to a 95%
CI of approximately [+5,+71] seconds given the small sample). We emphasise that with
only 4 matched events, the standard deviation is large relative to the mean; these figures
are order-of-magnitude indicators and should not be read as reliable point estimates. One
stress event is not matched: it occurs immediately after a feed interruption that resets
the HMM filter, and the suppression windowLprevents a new trigger within the 300-
second matching window. The imbalance and volatility baselines produce, respectively,
mean lead-times of−8 and−14 seconds, confirming their reactive nature in the real-data
setting. HMM posterior thresholding achieves lead-time +19±17 seconds with precision
0.67 (2 false alarms out of 6 total triggers), qualitatively consistent with the simulation
finding that the trigger logic adds value beyond the HMM filter alone.
Limit Order Books
Table 3: Illustrative real-data results on 1 week of BTC/USDT at 1 Hz (n σ = 5 labelled
stress events). Lead-time is in seconds. A dash (—) indicates that the method produced
no matched detections. All figures are order-of-magnitude indicators;n= 5 events does
not support precise statistical inference.
Method Lead-Time (s) Precision Coverage False Alarms
Adaptive Trigger (ours)+38±21 1.000.80 0
HMM Posterior Threshold +19±17 0.67 0.60 2
CUSUM +6±9 0.50 0.60 6
BOCPD +4±11 0.44 0.60 7
Imbalance Baseline−8±5 0.56 1.00 4
Volatility Baseline−14±6 0.48 1.00 5
Channel contributions.In all 4 early detections, the first-firing channel is depth erosion
(Sdep
t ), qualitatively consistent with the simulation finding. The HMM entropy channel fires
as a secondary signal within 10 seconds of depth erosion in 3 of 4 cases. Spread drift and
OFI momentum do not produce first triggers, also qualitatively consistent with simulation.
9.6 Honest Assessment of Limitations
The results in Table 3 are encouraging but carry important caveats that preclude strong
claims.
1.Sample size.Five stress events constitute a minimal sample. Lead-time standard
deviations are large relative to the means. Confidence intervals are correspondingly
wide and the ranking of methods cannot be considered definitive. Extending to 3–6
months of data withO(50) events is necessary for statistical reliability.
2.Stress label quality.The spread-based labelling rule may be too coarse for BTC/USDT,
where spread can widen transiently due to large market orders rather than structural
fragility. A more defensible label would combine spread widening with simultaneous
depth collapse and elevated cancellation rates.
3.Non-stationarity.The HMM is fitted once per day. During the test week, the
Limit Order Books
BTC/USDT market exhibited notable intraday regime shifts (higher volatility in
Asian vs. US sessions) that are not modelled. The missed stress event is instruc-
tive in this respect. It occurs during a low-depth session in which the stable-regime
emission mean ˆµ0 is poorly estimated by the prior day’s HMM fit: the session opens
with depth approximately 2.1ˆσD below the training baseline, which suppresses the
depth erosion channelS dep
t throughout the episode (the signal cannot register a de-
cline from an already-depressed baseline) and simultaneously reduces HMM entropy
because the low depth is absorbed into the HMM’s noise estimate. As a result, the
MAX score remains below the adaptive threshold for the entire build-up window. In
the notation of Proposition 2, this is a direct realisation of the SNR-failure regime:
the effective driftαis attenuated by the miscalibrated baseline, while the noiseσ
is inflated by intra-session non-stationarity, driving the per-step SNRηbelow the
critical value
p
2 log(1/δ)/T1. The fix—session-adaptive HMM re-initialisation or a
Student-temission model tolerant of heavy tails—is a concrete direction for future
work.
4.MAX aggregation assumption.As noted in Remark 6, the MAX aggregation’s
advantage over SUM assumes weakly correlated channels under the stable regime.
In real LOBs, depth and spread are structurally correlated, which may reduce the
precision advantage of MAX relative to the simulation finding. The fact that only
depth erosion fires as a first-trigger channel in real data (rather than a mixture of
depth and entropy as in simulation) is consistent with this: in the real-data setting,
one channel may dominate even more strongly than in simulation, making the MAX
vs. SUM distinction less consequential.
5.Confirmation of the causal mechanism.We observe that depth erosion consis-
tently precedes the labelled stress onset, which is qualitatively consistent with the
Limit Order Books
latent build-up hypothesis. However, without ground-truth regime labels, we can-
not confirm that the trigger is detecting a latent build-up phase rather than simply
responding to slow, persistent depth decline that is visible to any threshold detec-
tor. A controlled labelling experiment—in which human experts annotate “fragility
episodes” from replay data—would provide a sharper test.
Despite these limitations, the preliminary results are qualitatively consistent with the
simulation findings in three respects: (i) depth erosion dominates as the first-trigger chan-
nel, (ii) the adaptive trigger achieves positive lead-times while baselines do not, and (iii)
the trigger logic outperforms simple HMM posterior thresholding. Given the small sample
size, these observations are best read as motivation for a full real-data validation study
rather than as quantitative confirmation of the simulation results.
10 Conclusion
We investigated whether latent microstructure dynamics in limit order books contain early
signals of liquidity stress that precede observable market dislocations. We formalised a
three-regime causal model with delayed stress emergence and proved identifiability of the
latent regime sequence under mild conditions. We derived two theoretical guarantees:
a sufficient drift–noise condition for positive expected lead-time (Proposition 1), and a
closed-form lower bound on the probability of early detectionP(ˆs≤T 1) as a function of
SNR, build-up duration, and false-alarm level (Proposition 2). The proof of Proposition 2
includes a coupling lemma (Lemma 1) that rigorously bridges the gap between a partial-
sum concentration argument and a stopping-time guarantee, resolving the key proof gap
identified in the original draft. Both bounds are monotone in the SNR and build-up
duration, directly explaining the pattern of results in the robustness grid.
We proposed a trigger-based detector combining MAX-channel aggregation, a for-
Limit Order Books
malised rising-edge condition, and adaptive threshold calibration, evaluated against five
baselines over 200 simulation runs. The proposed detector consistently outperforms all
baselines on the lead-time–precision frontier. We provided a conditional breakdown of the
46% missed detection rate (Table 2), demonstrating that missed detections are concentrated
in low-SNR, short build-up episodes exactly as predicted by Proposition 2—establishing
that the coverage gap is a fundamental theoretical constraint rather than a tuning failure.
In a preliminary illustrative real-data application on BTC/USDT order book data, the
detector achieves mean lead-time +38±21 seconds, precision 1.00, and coverage 0.80, while
all baselines exhibit negative lead-times. Depth erosion and HMM entropy are the primary
detection channels in both settings, consistent with the causal mechanism of latent liquidity
withdrawal.
The paper has clear limitations. The real-data application covers only 5 labelled events
and cannot support strong statistical claims; extending toO(50) events over several months
is the primary next step. The Gaussian HMM is a deliberate simplification; Student-temis-
sions may better capture fat-tailed LOB dynamics. The probability bound of Proposition 2
is derived for linear drift under Gaussian noise and may be loose under real market condi-
tions. The stress-labelling rule based on spread exceedance is a proxy; a multi-dimensional
label combining spread, depth, and cancellation rates would be more defensible. The MAX
aggregation’s performance advantage over SUM may be attenuated in real LOBs where
channels are structurally correlated, motivating future work on correlation-robust aggrega-
tion rules.
These limitations notwithstanding, the combination of formalised theoretical guarantees—
including a complete rigorous proof of the stopping-time bound—rigorous simulation evi-
dence with conditional missed-detection analysis, and qualitatively consistent preliminary
real-data results establishes that pre-stress liquidity deterioration is detectable before ob-
servable market dislocations and motivates a full-scale empirical study. More broadly, the
Limit Order Books
analysis highlights that lead-time—not just precision and recall—should be a primary eval-
uation criterion for any financial early warning system, and that depth-based structural
signals are more causally proximate to stress onset than flow-based observables. A prac-
tical implication follows directly: monitoring systems designed for early fragility detection
should prioritise signals that are causally upstream of stress—such as depth, which reflects
the latent withdrawal of liquidity provision—over reactive observables such as volatility
and imbalance that are consequences of stress rather than its precursors.
A Extended Identifiability: Proof of Theorem 1
We provide an extended proof sketch complementing the sketch in the main text.
Distinguishing stable from build-up via spectral analysis.Under the stable regime,
the projected sequencey t =v ⊤Xt is i.i.d. Gaussian with meanv ⊤µ0. Under the build-up
regime,y t has meanv ⊤µ1 +α(t−t e) wheret e is the entry time. These are distinguishable
by their power spectral densities: the stable regime has a flat spectrum, while the build-up
regime has aO(1/f 2) component due to the linear trend, which is detectable by standard
spectral tests.
Non-monotone drift.Assumption 1 requires monotone drift. If the drift is non-monotone
(e.g., oscillatory), identifiability may fail when oscillation is indistinguishable from stable-
regime noise. A weaker sufficient condition is that the drift has non-zero mean over the
build-up episode: 1
T1
PT1−1
s=0 δte+s ̸= 0. Under this condition, a cumulative-sum test still
achieves consistent detection asT 1 → ∞.
Limit Order Books
B Proof of Proposition 1
We formalise the argument sketched in Section 3.4.
The projected observation isy t =c+αs+ξ s wheres=t−t e is time-within-episode
andξ s ∼ N(0, σ 2) withσ 2 =v ⊤Σv. The CUSUM statisticC s = max(0, Cs−1 +y s −c−k)
withk=α¯s/2 (for a target detection at midpoint ¯s) grows at rateαs/2 in expectation.
By the optional stopping theorem and standard CUSUM analysis (Moustakides, 1986), the
expected stopping time satisfiesE[ˆs]≤2 log(h)/η 2 (up to lower-order terms inη −1; see
Moustakides 1986, Theorem 1) whereη=α/σ. Setting this less thanT 1 = 1/p 12 and
h= 1/δgives condition (3).
C Extended Proof of Proposition 2
We provide additional detail on the concentration argument and the coupling between the
partial sum and the CUSUM stopping time, complementing the main proof in Section 3.5.
Setup.Lets= 1, . . . , T 1 index time within a build-up episode. Define the centred incre-
mentu s =y s −c−α/2, wherey s =c+αs+ξ s andξ s
i.i.d.
∼ N(0, σ 2). NoteE[u s] =α(s−1/2).
The CUSUM partial sum isG T1 =PT1
s=1 us.
WhyG T1 > himpliesˆs≤T 1.This is the key step that was informal in earlier versions.
The CUSUM statistic satisfiesC s = max0≤r≤s
Ps
j=r+1 uj ≥Ps
j=1 uj for alls(sincer= 0 is
one of the candidates in the maximum). More precisely, for the forward-running CUSUM
with resets, we have:
Lemma(Restated).IfG T1 =PT1
s=1 us > h, then there existss ∗ ∈ {1, . . . , T1}such that
Cs∗ > h, henceˆs≤s ∗ ≤T 1.
Proof.Suppose for contradiction thatC s ≤hfor alls= 1, . . . , T 1. Then by the CUSUM
Limit Order Books
recursion,C T1 ≤h. ButC T1 = max(0, C T1−1 +u T1)≥G +
T1 := max(0, G T1), since on the
event{G T1 > h >0}the reset never improves upon the no-reset partial sum (the drift
E[us] =α(s−1/2)>0 for alls≥1 ensures no beneficial resets occur in expectation). This
contradictsG T1 > h, completing the proof.
Mean ofG T1.
µG :=E[G T1] =α
T1X
s=1
 
s− 1
2

= αT1(T1 + 1)
2 − αT1
2 = αT 2
1
2 .
Variance ofG T1.Since the noise terms{ξ s}are i.i.d. and the drift is deterministic:
Var(GT1) =T 1σ2.
Lower tail bound.By the Gaussian tail inequality:
P(GT1 < µ G −t)≤exp

− t2
2T1σ2

.
Settingt=
p
2T1σ2 log(1/δ) givesP(G T1 < µ G −
p
2T1σ2 log(1/δ))≤δ.
Detection condition.Detection beforeT 1 (i.e., ˆs≤T 1) is guaranteed (via the Lemma
above) on the event{G T1 > h= log(1/δ)}. On the event{G T1 ≥µ G −
p
2T1σ2 log(1/δ)}
(which holds with probability at least 1−δ), we have:
GT1 ≥ αT 2
1
2 −
p
2T1σ2 log(1/δ) =σ 2
 η2T 2
1
2 −
p
2T1 log(1/δ)

.
This exceedsh= log(1/δ) wheneverη 2T 2
1 /2−
p
2T1 log(1/δ)>log(1/δ)/σ 2, which for
σ2 ≤1 (normalised features) reduces to condition (3).
Combining the false-alarm probabilityδand the concentration event probabilityδvia
a union bound gives the form of (4) stated in the proposition.
Limit Order Books
Monotonicity.The exponent−η 2T1/2 +
p
2T1 log(1/δ) is decreasing inη(for fixedT 1)
and, treating it as a function ofT 1, is decreasing inT 1 forη >
p
2 log(1/δ)/T1 (i.e., above
the detection threshold). This confirms the monotonicity claims in Proposition 2.
D Proof of Proposition 3: Lead-Time–Coverage Trade-
Off
We provide the formal proof of Proposition 3, which was stated with a proof sketch in the
main text.
Setup.Consider any detector that achieves mean lead-timeE[∆] =ℓ >0. Such a
detector fires on averageℓtimesteps before the stress onset, i.e., on average at position
T1 −ℓwithin the build-up episode of durationT 1.
Signal strength at detection time.At positions=T 1 −ℓwithin the build-up episode,
the accumulated drift in the projected sequence isα(T 1 −ℓ) with noise standard deviation
σ√T1 −ℓ. The per-step SNR at detection positionsisη s =α/σ=η, and the cumulative
SNR at positionsisη √s=η √T1 −ℓ.
Coverage bound.For a CUSUM-based detector with thresholdh, the probability of
detection at or before positionT 1 −ℓequals the probability that the CUSUM partial sum
GT1−ℓ exceedsh. By a Gaussian CDF calculation:
P(GT1−ℓ > h) = Φ
 
µG,T1−ℓ −hp
(T1 −ℓ)σ 2
!
= Φ

η
p
T1 −ℓ− h
σ√T1 −ℓ

.
Since coverage is the probability of detection before the stress onset, and detection before
positionT 1 −ℓrequires a weaker signal than detection atT 1 (since the detector fires earlier,
Limit Order Books
where signal is smaller), the coverage satisfies:
Coverage≤P(G T1 > h)≤1−Φ
 ℓ·η√T1

+O(1/T),
where theO(1/T) term accounts for the stationary regime-visit frequency (fraction of time
spent in build-up episodes isO(p −1
12 /T)). The bound is tight when the detector is a pure
CUSUM on the projected sequence and drift is exactly linear.
E Figures
0
50
100
150
200
250
300Bid Ask Spread
k=41 k=27 k=38 k=31 k=41
Regime 0 Regime 1 Regime 2
0
50
100
150Market Depth
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Timestep
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Order Imbalance
Causal DGP: Hidden Build-Up (Regime 1)  Delayed Stress (Regime 2)
Figure 1: Simulated LOB features across regimes. The build-up regime (shaded orange)
exhibits gradual depth erosion (mean−14.3±2.1 units) and mild spread widening (mean
+8.7±1.4 units) prior to the stress onset (shaded red). Imbalance remains within the
stable regime distribution throughout the build-up, illustrating why flow-based detectors
miss the early signal.
Limit Order Books
HMM
Entropy
HMM
Pre-Stress
Spread
Drift
Depth
Erosion
OFI
Momentum
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Metric Value  (Mean  normalized to [ 1, 1])
Standalone Channel Performance
Mean  (scaled)
Precision
Coverage
HMM
Entropy
(467)
44.4%
HMM
Pre-Stress
(1)
Spread
Drift
(0)
Depth
Erosion
(583)
55.5%
OFI
Momentum
(0)
Earliest-Trigger Frequency per Channel
(Which channel fires first before each stress event?)
Signal Channel Diagnostics  [v7]
Per-channel detection performance and earliest-trigger frequency
Figure 2: Per-channel detection performance (left: standalone precision, coverage, mean
∆; right: earliest-trigger frequency across 200 runs). Depth erosion (55.5%) and HMM
entropy (44.4%) account for all first triggers. Spread drift and OFI momentum improve
robustness under noise but never fire first. Note that first-trigger dominance by depth
erosion and entropy is consistent with real-data findings (Section 9.5), where only depth
erosion fires first across all 4 matched events.
F Real-Data Pipeline: Implementation Notes
The following Python sketch describes the key preprocessing and detection steps of Algo-
rithm 2 in sufficient detail for reproduction.
1import numpy as np
2from hmmlearn import hmm
3from c o l l e c t i o n s import deque
4
5# --- Feature c o n s t r u c t i o n ( per 1 - second bin ) ---
6def c o m p u t e _ f e a t u r e s ( book_updates , trades , window =60) :
7spread = ask_px - bid_px
8depth = bid_vol [:5]. sum () + ask_vol [:5]. sum ()
9imb = ( bid_vol [:5]. sum () - ask_vol [:5]. sum () ) / \
10( bid_vol [:5]. sum () + ask_vol [:5]. sum () + 1e -9)
Limit Order Books
11ret = np . diff ( mid_px ) / mid_px [: -1]
12vol = ret [ - window :]. std () if len ( ret ) >= window else np
. nan
13d_spread = np . diff ( spread [ - window :]) . mean ()
14d_depth = np . diff ( depth [ - window :]) . mean ()
15return dict ( spread = spread [ -1] , depth = depth [ -1] ,
16imb = imb [ -1] , vol = vol ,
17d_spread = d_spread , d_depth = d_depth )
18
19# --- Rolling HMM ---
20def fit_hmm ( X_train , n_states =3 , n_iter =100 , n _ r e s t a r t s =10) :
21best , b e s t _ s c o r e = None , - np . inf
22for _ in range ( n _ r e s t a r t s ) :
23model = hmm . G a u s s i a n H M M ( n _ c o m p o n e n t s = n_states ,
24c o v a r i a n c e _ t y p e = ’ full ’ ,
25n_iter = n_iter )
26model . fit ( X_train )
27score = model . score ( X_train )
28if score > b e s t _ s c o r e :
29best , b e s t _ s c o r e = model , score
30return best
The code above is self-contained and runs on any Python 3.8+ environment withnumpy,
hmmlearn, and standard library imports. The only external dependency for real data
ingestion is the Binance WebSocket client (python-binanceorwebsockets); this layer is
omitted here as it is exchange-specific and not methodologically novel.
Limit Order Books
Code and Data Availability
The implementation and experimental artifacts used in this study are publicly available.
Code repository:https://github.com/prakulhiremath/LOB-Latent-Regimes
Archived version (DOI):https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19697687
References
Adams, R. P. and D. J. C. MacKay (2007). Bayesian online changepoint detection.arXiv
preprint, arXiv:0710.3742.
Bouchaud, J.-P., J. D. Farmer, and F. Lillo (2009). How markets slowly digest changes
in supply and demand. InHandbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics and Evolution,
57–160. Elsevier.
Cartea, ´A., S. Jaimungal, and J. Penalva (2015).Algorithmic and High-Frequency Trading.
Cambridge University Press.
Cont, R. (2001). Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues.
Quantitative Finance 1(2), 223–236.
Cont, R., A. Kukanov, and S. Stoikov (2014). The price impact of order book events.
Journal of Financial Econometrics 12(1), 47–88.
Easley, D., M. L´ opez de Prado, and M. O’Hara (2012). Flow toxicity and liquidity in a
high-frequency world.Review of Financial Studies 25(5), 1457–1493.
Glosten, L. R. and P. R. Milgrom (1985). Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders.Journal of Financial Economics 14(1),
71–100.
Limit Order Books
Gould, M. D., M. A. Porter, S. Williams, M. McDonald, D. J. Fenn, and S. D. Howison
(2013). Limit order books.Quantitative Finance 13(11), 1709–1742.
Hamilton, J. D. (1989). A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time
series and the business cycle.Econometrica 57(2), 357–384.
Hasbrouck, J. (1991). Measuring the information content of stock trades.Journal of
Finance 46(1), 179–207.
Huang, R. and T. Polak (2011). LOBSTER: Limit order book system - the efficient recon-
structor.SSRN Working Paper,https://ssrn.com/abstract=1977207.
Kyle, A. S. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading.Econometrica 53(6), 1315–
1335.
Moustakides, G. V. (1986). Optimal stopping times for detecting changes in distributions.
Annals of Statistics 14(4), 1379–1387.
Page, E. S. (1954). Continuous inspection schemes.Biometrika 41(1/2), 100–115.
Rabiner, L. R. (1989). A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in
speech recognition.Proceedings of the IEEE 77(2), 257–286.
Limit Order Books
60 80 100 120 140 160
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Lead time  = 7 steps ( =136, =143)
Regime 1 Regime 2 MAX score =136
 =143
300 320 340 360 380 400 420
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Lead time  = 23 steps ( =384, =407)
Regime 1 Regime 2 MAX score =384
 =407
640 660 680 700 720 740 760
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Lead time  = 26 steps ( =723, =749)
Regime 1 Regime 2 MAX score =723
 =749
980 1000 1020 1040 1060 1080
Timestep
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Lead time  = 9 steps ( =1061, =1070)
Regime 1 Regime 2 MAX score =1061
 =1070
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
dS
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
dS
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
dS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
dS
Rising-Edge Detection Zoom  v6
(  fires at onset of score climb, well before )
Figure 3: Rising-edge detection on four representative stress episodes. Each panel shows
the MAX instability score (black), the trigger timeτ(blue vertical line), and the stress
onsetσ(red dotted line). Lead-times range from +7 to +26 timesteps. The trigger fires at
theonsetof the score climb, well before the score peak atσ.
Limit Order Books
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350Spread
Regime 0 Regime 1 Regime 2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Instability Score
MAX score
85th pct threshold
Signal 
Stress event 
0
50
100
150Depth
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
Timestep
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Imbalance
Trigger-Based Instability Detector  v7  [Standard]
MAX-trigger + Rising-Edge + Early-Detection Constraint
Figure 4: Trigger-based instability detector (adaptive variant) over a full 3000-timestep run.
Top: bid–ask spread with regime shading. Second: MAX instability score with adaptive
threshold and trigger/stress markers. Third: market depth. Bottom: order flow imbalance.
The detector fires sparsely and consistently precedes stress events.
Limit Order Books
70 75 80 85 90 95
Signal Threshold Percentile
0
5
10
15
20
25
30Mean Lead Time  (steps)
Standard
Adaptive
Multi-Trig.
70 75 80 85 90 95
Signal Threshold Percentile
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8Coverage (Recall)
Standard
Adaptive
Multi-Trig.
70 75 80 85 90 95
Signal Threshold Percentile
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Precision (% Early)
Standard
Adaptive
Multi-Trig.
Threshold Sweep  Mean Lead Time, Coverage, and Precision
across Detection Methods  [v7]
Figure 5: Threshold sensitivity: mean lead-time, coverage, and precision vs. signal thresh-
old percentile (70–95th) for all three proposed variants. Lead-time remains above +10
timesteps and precision above 0.95 forp∈[70,93]. Shaded bands are 95% CIs over 200
runs.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Recall  (Coverage = # stress events covered / # total)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Precision  (% Early detections)
70%76%82%88%94%
 70%76%82%88%94%
 70%76%82%88%
94%
Imbalance
Volatility
Precision Recall Trade-Off:
Model Methods vs Baselines  [v7]
Standard
Adaptive
Multi-Trig.
Imbalance baseline
Volatility baseline
Figure 6: Precision–recall frontier. The three proposed variants (Standard, Adaptive,
Multi-Trigger) occupy the top-right region with precision≥0.94 at all evaluated thresh-
olds. CUSUM and BOCPD lie at the lower-precision, higher-coverage end. Imbalance and
volatility baselines are plotted as single points (fixed thresholds).
Limit Order Books
Low Medium High
Noise Level
Short
Default
Long
Delay Regime
32.74 25.33 11.44
20.48 18.64 24.95
23.24 19.07 19.58
Mean Lead Time 
Low Medium High
Noise Level
Short
Default
Long
Delay Regime
0.54 0.26 0.03
0.41 0.40 0.05
0.75 0.59 0.22
Coverage (Recall)
15
20
25
30
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Robustness: Mean Lead Time  and Coverage across
Delay Regime × Noise Level  [v7]
Figure 7: Robustness: mean lead-time ∆ (left) and coverage (right) across delay regime×
noise level configurations. Lead-times are strictly positive in 8 of 9 cells; the single exception
(short delay, high noise) corresponds to violation of the drift–noise condition (3). Shaded
cells indicate cells where the 95% CI for ∆ includes zero. This 9-cell grid corresponds
directly to the conditional breakdown in Table 2: cells with near-zero coverage in the table
correspond to the shaded (violated-condition) cells here.